# Notation
In doing some research on common notation, I stumbled across a wonderful [notation summary](https://www.math.ucdavis.edu/~anne/WQ2007/mat67-Common_Math_Symbols.pdf) from UC Davis.  That summary is linked above and reproduced here.

## Binary Relations
$$=$$ (**the equals sign**) means “is the same as” and was first introduced in the 1557 book The Whetstone of Witte by Robert Recorde (c. 1510-1558). He wrote, ”I will sette as I doe often in woorke use, a paire of parralles, or Gemowe lines of one lengthe, thus : ==, bicause noe 2, thynges, can be moare equalle.” (Recorde used an elongated form of the modern equals sign.)
$$\lt$$ (**the less than sign**) mean “is strictly less than”, and $$\gt$$ (**the greater than sign**) means “is strictly greater than”. They first appeared in Artis Analyticae Praxis ad Aequationes Algebraicas Resolvendas (“The Analytical Arts Applied to Solving Algebraic Equations”) by Thomas Harriot (1560-1621), which was published posthumously in 1631.Pierre Bouguer (1698-1758) later refined these to $$\leq$$ (“**less than or equals**”) and $$\geq$$ (“**greater than or equals**”) in 1734.
$$:=$$ (**the equal by definition sign**) means “is equal by definition to”. This is a common alternate form of the symbol “=Def ”, which appears in the 1894 book Logica Matematica by the logicianCesare Burali-Forti (1861–1931). Other common alternate forms of the symbol “=Def ” include “=” with a def written directly above the symbol and “≡”, the latter being especially common in applied mathematics.


## Some Symbols from Mathematical Logic

$$\therefore$$ (**three dots**) means “therefore” and first appeared in print in the 1659 book Teusche Algebra (“Teach Yourself Algebra”) by Johann Rahn (1622-1676).
$$\ni$$ (**the such that sign**) means “under the condition that”. However, it is much more common (and less ambiguous) to just abbreviate “such that” as “s.t.”.
$$\Longrightarrow$$ (**the implies sign**) means “logically implies that”. (E.g., “if it’s raining, then it’s pouring” is equivalent to saying “it’s raining ⇒ it’s pouring.”)The history of this symbol is unclear.
⇐⇒ (**the iff sign**) means “if and only if” and is used to connect logically equivalent statements. (E.g., “it’s raining iff it’s really humid” means simultaneously that “if it’s raining, then it’s really humid” and that “if it’s really humid, then it’s raining”. In other words, the statement “it’s raining” implies the statement “it’s really humid” and vice versa.)This notation “iff” is attributed to the great mathematician Paul R. Halmos (1916–2006).

$$\forall$$ (**the universal quantifier symbol**) means “for all” and was first used in the 1935 publication Untersuchungen ueber das logische Schliessen (“Investigations on Logical Reasoning”) by Gerhard Gentzen (1909-1945). He called it the All-Zeichen (“all character”), in analogy with “∃” (read: “there exists”).
$$\exists$$ (**the existential quantifier**) means “there exists” and was first used in the 1897 book For- mulaire de mathematiqus by Giuseppe Peano (1858-1932).
$$\square$$ (**the Halmos tombstone**) means “QED”, which is an abbreviation for the Latin phrase quod erat demonstrandum (“which was to be proven”). “QED” has been the most common way to symbolize the end of a logical argument for many centuries, but the modern convention in mathematics is to use the “tombstone” in place of “QED”.This “tombstone” notation is attributed to the great mathematician Paul R. Halmos (1916– 2006).

## Some Notation from Set Theory

⊂ (**the is included in sign**) means “this set is a subset of” and ⊃ (the includes sign) means “this set has as a subset”. They were introduced in the 1890 book Vorlesungen u ̈ber die Algebra der Logik (“Lectures on the Algebra of the Logic”) by Ernst Schr ̈oder (1841-1902).∈ (**the is in sign**) means “is an element of” and first appeared in the 1895 book Formulaire de mathematiqus by Giuseppe Peano (1858-1932). Peano originally used the Greek letter ε (which is the first letter of the Latin word est, meaning “is”), but it was Betrand Russell (1872- 1970) in his 1903 Principles of Mathematics that introduced the modern stylized version.∪ (**the union sign**) means “take the elements that are in either set”, and ∩ (the intersection sign) means “take the elements that the two sets have in common”. They were introduced in the 1888 book Calcolo geometrico secondo l’Ausdehnungslehre di H. Grassmann preceduto dalle operazioni della logica deduttiva (“Geometric Calculus based upon the teachings of H. Grassman, preceded by the operations of deductive logic”) by Giuseppe Peano (1858-1932).∅ (**the null set or empty set symbol**) means “the set without any elements in it” and was first used in the 1939 book E ́l ́ements de math ́ematique by N. Bourbaki (a group of primarily European mathematicians—not a single person). It was borrowed simultaneously from the Norwegian, Danish and Faroese alphabets by group member Andr ́e Weil (1906-1998).∞ (**infinity**) denotes “a number of arbitrarily large magnitude” and first appeared in print in the 1655 book De Sectionibus Conicus (“On Conic Section”) by John Wallis (1616-1703).Conjectured explanations for why Wallis used this symbol include its resemblance to the symbol 
oo used by Romans to denote the number 1000, its resemblance to the final letter of the Greek alphabet ω (and so is synonymous with being the “final” number), and the symbolism of the fact that one can traverse a given curve infinitely often.

## Some Important Numbers in Mathematics
π (**the ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a circle**) denotes the number 3.141592653589..., and was first used by William Jones (1675-1749) in his 1706 book Syn- opsis palmariorum mathesios (“A New Introduction to the Mathematics”). However, it was Leonhard Euler (1707-1783) who first popularized the use of the letter π for this number in his 1748 book Introductio in Analysin Infinitorum.Many people speculate that Jones chose the letter π because it’s the first letter in Greek word perimetron (περιμετρoν), which roughly means “around”.e (**the natural logarithm base**) denotes the number 2.718281828459 . . ., was first used by Leonhard Euler (1707-1783) in the manuscript Meditatio in Experimenta explosione tormentorum nuper instituta (“Meditation on experiments made recently on the firing of cannon”), written when he was just 21 years old. (Note that e is the first letter in exponential.)The very famous mathematician Edmund Landau (1877-1938) once wrote that “The letter e may now no longer be used to denote anything other than this positive universal constant.”γ (**the Euler-Mascheroni constant**)denotes the number 0.577215664901...,and was first used by Lorenzo Mascheroni (1750-1800) in his 1792 Adnotationes ad Euleri Cal- culum Integralem (“Annotations to Euler’s Integral Calculus”).The number γ is usually considered to be the third most important important non-basic number in mathematics, following closely π and e.$$i = \sqrt{-1}$$ (**the imaginary unit**) was first used by Leonhard Euler (1707-1783) in his 1777 memoir Institutionum calculi integralis (“Foundations of Integral Calculus”).